Introduction to Ethics.

The battle between ethics and morals.

The difference between ethics and morals is subtle but important.

Morals define personal character and knowing the difference between right and wrong.
Ethics point towards a social system. It is within this social system that morals are applied.
Put in another way, ethics point to standards (or codes) of behaviour belonging to a body of people.

Anyone who belongs to a group are expected to uphold those standards of that group.

Examples of groups of ethics include:

Social ethics
Company ethics
Professional ethics
Family ethics
Political ethics
Military ethics
Medical ethics
In the workplace morals and ethics need to be examined carefully.

Morality and ethics can impact our personal and working lives.

Company Ethics may play against personal morality.

Corporations may create unreasonable demands on employees who may feel pressured to choose between family obligations in particularly when there is a demanding, stressful and consuming work ethic in place.

On the other hand theft and or fraud, reflect poor morals for those employees who engage in that type of behaviour. These morals result in job losses.

Societal ethics can also be a touchy topic. 

Consider this:

Abortion in some countries is legal and therefore medically ethical. But this issue raises moral concerns for many individuals who consider abortion to be immoral. This then leads other issues such as discrimination and legal rights.

Another example:

Gaming designers may create a game with involves death, murder or violence. A game designer is not breaking the law. Morally, howeer, murder and violence is considered wrong.

For more information please go to:

http://www.wisegeek.org/what-is-the-difference-between-ethics-and-morals.htm

Ethics in the Classroom 

Ethical conduct in the classroom and learning environment is critical to successful teaching. Teachers, with the intention of benefiting all students, often encounter a plethora of student behaviors which affect learning such as:

Lack of motivation
Unpreparedness
Tardiness
Absenteeism
Plagiarism
Vandalism
Developing a classroom code of ethics can be used to reinforce appropriate behavior and may include the following points:

Be respectful to other students by listening to others points of view
Be respectful to other students by not interrupting or talking over others when they are speaking
Contribute to class activities and discussions
Respect student and faculty property
Keep your workspace / desk tidy
Clean up after yourself
Be aware of how much noise you are making
Submit work on time
Be original in your designs
Attempt each project with the best intentions and to the best of your ability
Be open to new cultures and ideas
Be kind and courteous
Be attentive in class
Put rubbish in the bin
Sample of Classroom Code of Ethics


1. Privacy and confidentiality

- Don't take photos of other students or their work, without permission

- Don't share logins, or ask for others log in details

- Don't share any confidential or private information of other people on social media

 

2. Copyright procedures for all assessments

- Don't copy other students work

- If you're using another person's material, don't try to pass it off as your original work

- Respect copyright owners e.g. use citations/credit content creators where necessary


3. Ethical behaviour as a designer in class

- Give respect to others

- Follow teacher's instructions

- Don't answer phone calls in class – excuse yourself and go outside

 

4. WHS procedure and issues

- Set up work stations correctly – correct heights, lighting, chairs

- Keep the classroom clean and tidy – place rubbish in bins

- Follow WHS signs

 

5. Communication strategy and class behaviour

- Respectfully communicate with each other

- Don't send inappropriate texts or emails to each other
- Email your teacher if you are absent

Further reading:

http://www.ehow.com/info_7855482_classroom-ethics.html
http://teaching.monster.com/benefits/articles/3522-creating-an-ethical-classroom

Ethics in the Workplace

A workplace may establish a code of ethics to assist employees understand the difference between right and wrong.

A code of ethics may set out operational principles or guidelines about organizational  beliefs on matters such as the environment, mission and quality control.

In order for a business to succeed personal and operational guidelines need to be determined.

Three main fundamentals to a workplace code of ethics:

Legal:

Each person in a business must follow the law of their country and state. Legal code of conducts are generally not written down in each business, but there may be instances where specific legalities may be specified.

For example a pub or nightclub may specify crowd limits, bouncer etiquette, or a drinking maximum in accordance with the law.

Equal opportunity for employment is often specified in writing as part of a code of conduct or mission statement.

Moral:

This relates to personal character.

Respect for yourself and others is the fundamental principal behind ethical behaviour in the workplace.

Core fundamental morals include:

Not harming others
Making things better
Respecting others
Being fair
Being loving
For more information:

http://www.education.com/magazine/article/cheating-ethics/

http://smallbusiness.chron.com/code-ethics-work-place-2735.html

http://resources.fahcsia.gov.au/ConsumerTrainingSupportProducts/docs/employees/workplace_behaviours_trainers_guide.pdf

Professional:

A professional code of conduct often includes information regarding employee behaviour such as how to treat other staff, clients and customers.

These code of ethics vary from business to business.

 

Maintaining ethics codes:

It is important to educate and monitor ethics and their application in an organization.

An organisaton must also continue to apply code of ethics in the workplace as laws do change.

As organizational policy is updated and reviewed, the information must be distributed and available to all staff for continual implementation.

Updated policy can be distributed via

meetings,
emails
noticeboards,
internet/ intranet
apps/ multimedia presentaitons
Consider how technology has altered the way information is now collected, used stored digitally. The ethics and privacy laws regarding online data storage (for example) had to be created by governments which were then implemented and filtered through to each organization and then to it’s employees.

The education of the rights, obligations and responsibilities for each staff member is therefore very important and essential to the successful running of a business.

 

Written policies:

Written policies must be created which make rights and responsibilities clear to everyone to enable an organisation to succeed.

A law firm may have a code reflecting attire and dress code. While a car dealership may have specific information relating to consumer information and sales process.

Other examples include:

Confidentiality
Customer complaints
Customer feedback
Conflict resolutions reflect
Dress code
Using Emails
Borrowing equipment
Internet usage
Accepting direction
Punctuality
Workplace hazards
Copyright
Privacy
 

Grievance Procedures

Confidential reporting of any ethical issues must also allow for the establishment of a grievance procedure. This is to allow for confidential reporting of any ethical issues, which may arise in the workplace.

Humanrights.gov.au provides a basic structure of what is to be implemented in a complaints procedure.

The final checklist is attached but the overall must include:

Informal complaint procedures

This method involves procedures to resolve a dispute informally rather than concerns about facts or evidence. Usually for complaints of  a less serious nature.

Formal complaint procedures

This method involves determining whether a  complaint can be substantiated with facts and evidence.  The process also involves brining the parties together to try and reach a satisfactory outcome. This occurs when informal methods fail.

The steps involved in a formal complaint

Consistency and fairness  should be documented in the steps involved in a formal complaint.

The sequence is usually as follows:

the complainant is interviewed with allegations documented in writing
the allegations detailed to perpetrator in full
an opportunity for the perpetrator to respond and defend themselves
evidence and statements gathered from witnesses are collected
a determination is made whether there is substance to the claim
The decision maker (often senior management) is given a documentation of the case detailing  the process, evidence, findings and recommended outcome
The decision maker determines the recommended outcome or alternative action
Parties involved are permitted to have a representation/ support by union official, legal representation etc, to all meetings and proceedings
Consideration of evidence

It is important to note that a formal complaint should not be dismissed if no direct evidence can be obtained.  Other supporting  evidence may be relevant such as:

Evidence from a friend or co-worker, Medical records or counsellor
Personnel records, other complaints
If method and consistency in which evidence was presented
The absence of evidence where it should be logically exist.
Outcomes

Depending on factors such as the severity or frequency of the complaint outcomes may include any of the following in any combination:

Mediation with an aim of mutual resolution
A formal apology
Disciplinary action such as demotion, suspension etc
Official warnings
Disciplinary to the complainant if  evidence points to malicious intent
Re-crediting leave taken as a result of any harassment of discrimination
Counselling
If there is insufficient evidence to decide whether or not a final decision can be made employees must still:

Reiterate to those involved expected standards of conduct
Conduct further training to raise awareness to staff
Monitoring the situation carefully
Final Checklist about the grievance policy from https://www.humanrights.gov.au/developing-and-implementing-internal-complaints-procedures

Employers should ensure that their organisation’s internal complaints procedures:

are clearly documented and accessible to all employees
offer both informal and formal options
guarantee timeliness, confidentiality and objectivity
are administered by trained personnel
provide clear guidance on investigation procedures and record keeping
guarantee that no employee will be victimised or disadvantaged for making a complaint
are regularly reviewed for effectiveness.
For more information

www.humanrights.gov.au/employers/

https://www.humanrights.gov.au/developing-and-implementing-internal-complaints-procedures

 

Examples of Legislation

The professional body Australian Computer Society code of conduct is at:

http://www.acs.org.au/about-the-acs/member-conduct-and-discipline

This site details:

Member Conduct
Professional Conduct Case Studies
ACS National Regulations
Model codes of practice for other industries and business types can be found at:

http://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/sites/swa/model-whs-laws/model-cop/pages/model-cop

Communication and customer service
Business Communication includes:

WHS consultation process – always consult with staff and stay open to information using a HRS representative
Use the noticeboard and intranet to post policy updates
Gather feedback from stakeholders via meetings or surveys
Follow communication policy e.g.:
you are on call until 6pm
have all external tweets/ social media checked before posting
Check office phone messages
If sick please contact and advise your supervisor in person, not via text
Use Outlook Client for emails
Only hand out mobile numbers to clients of staff with work phones, not private numbers
Customer Service

• Returning messages
• Fulfilling your brief: listening to your client
• Going beyond minimal expectations
• Patience
• Good time management
• Attentiveness
• Clear communication
• Knowledge of product/ service
• Good design skills
• Good coding skills
• Up to date skills
• Being willing to learn


Distributing Policies

• Include in staff induction
• Memos
• Noticeboards
• Emails
• Intranet
• Business website
• Include updates as part of staff meetings
• Include as professional development tasks

Collecting Feedback

• Emails
• Meetings
• Noticeboards